--------------------------------------------
Virtual Jaguar v1.1.0 GCC/SDL release README
--------------------------------------------

--------------
- DISCLAIMER -
--------------

Or, "O liability, I do disclaim thee!"

Ported by SDLEMU (Niels Wagenaar & Carwin Jones) and is based upon the
original work by David Raingeard of Potato Emulation. For requirements please
consult the INSTALL file for more information about supported OS's and
software requirements.

The use of this software is entirely at your own risk. While it won't rape
your dog, it might do other nasty things. We can't be held responsible for
damage done to you hardware and/or software. You have been warned! This
software may require the use of the Atari Jaguar boot ROMs and/or Commercial
ROM images. You may only use the ROM images if you own the cartridges itself.
The use of Commercial ROMs without owning the original cartridge is illegal in
most countries and could result in fines and/or legal actions.

This software is released under the GPL v2 or later. For more information I
direct you to the GPL.TXT. You may hack/change the code anyway you like. You
may not commercially sell this software. If you make changes, release the
source code to the public and send the changes you made to the original
authors.

The products, trademarks and/or brands used in these documents and/or
sourcecode are owned by their respective companies and/or successors in
interest.

----------------------------------------------------------------
- IMPORTANT NOTE ABOUT JAGUAR FILE FORMATS--READ THIS OR ELSE! -
----------------------------------------------------------------

There seems to be a lot of confusion surrounding the various file formats that
Jaguar programs come in, and a lot of this confusion seem to come from
Cowering's GoodJag renaming tool. Note that it simply gets some files wrong,
and it also incorrectly renames cartridge images with an extension that
belongs to an already established extension (.jag is a Jaguar Server
executable--read on). To clarify, there are basically four major types of
Jaguar binary images that are NOT cartridge images:

    .abs
    .jag
    .rom
    .bin

The first type, the .abs file, is a DRI/Alcyon format absolute location
executable. These come in two different flavors and contain load and run
addresses in their headers. Note that some files which have an .abs extension
are really incorrectly labelled .bin files with no header information
whatsoever.

The second type, the .jag file, is a Jaguar Server executable. These files
contain header information that tells you where to load and run the file's
executable code. Note that as of this writing (8/5/2005) that the GoodJag ROM
renaming tool by Cowering incorrectly renames Jaguar cartridge ROM dumps to
have a .jag extension (a better choice, and the one supported by Virtual
Jaguar, is .j64)--if you're trying to run a ROM image with a .jag extension on
VJ, it will misinterpret it as a Jaguar Server executable and likely fail to
run.

The third type, the .rom file, is an Alpine Board/ROM Image file. These files
have no header, but are known to load and run at $802000 in the Jaguar memory
space. Again, these are *different* from cartridge dumps since they load at a
higher address than a Jaguar cartridge.

The fourth type, the .bin file, is simply a Jaguar executable with no header.
Since these files contain no information about where they load and execute,
Virtual Jaguar does not support this file type. Go bug the author to release
either a file with proper headers or a file in Alpine ROM format. Virtual
Jaguar is not omniscient (yet)! ;)

There is a fifth type of file that is supported by Virtual Jaguar, the .j64
file, which is simply a 1, 2, or 4 Meg dump of a Jaguar cartridge ROM which
loads at $800000 in the Jaguar memory space.

-----------------------------------
- What is Virtual Jaguar GCC/SDL? -
-----------------------------------

Virtual Jaguar is software dedicated to emulating the Atari Jaguar hardware on
a standard PC. The software was originally developed by David Raingeard of
Potato Emulation [http://potato.emu-france.com] and was released under the GPL
on 25 June 2003.

Virtual Jaguar GCC/SDL is not just a port of the MS Visual C++/SDL sourcecode
but has also been extended and rewritten so that we can enjoy Atari Jaguar
emulation on every platform that has a GCC compiler and a port of the Simple
Directmedia Layer library (SDL).

Currently Virtual Jaguar GCC/SDL compiles on WIN32 using mingw, and several
UN*X based systems (BeOS, Linux, FreeBSD and MacOS). It may run on other
systems as well but we can not guarantee that.

The port was done by the SDLEMU crew (http://sdlemu.ngemu.com) and especially
by Niels Wagenaar and Carwin Jones. A major portion of the rewrite was done by
James L. Hammons. You may contact us by e-mail (sdlemu@ngemu.com) or leave a
message on the SDLEMU Official Forum (see the website). Patches and bugfixes
are particularly welcome! :)

More information about the incredible SDL libraries can be found at
http://www.libsdl.org. Thanks Sam--you rock! :)

--------------------------------
- Using Virtual Jaguar GCC/SDL -
--------------------------------

After compiling the binary (see INSTALL) you can now run original Atari Jaguar
games. These games are distributed on cartridges and can therefore cannot be
used on a PC (we're still waiting for that Jaguar-on-a-PCI-card that you plug
into your late model PC, complete with cartridge slot and controller connectors
;-). To use these games on Virtual Jaguar GCC/SDL you need to get ROM images.
Besides the ROM images from commercial games, you may also need to obtain the
Atari Jaguar boot ROM (and/or CD boot ROM) which you must copy to the BIOS
directory. For legal issues concerning ROM images please consult the DISCLAIMER
at the beginning of this file.

After obtaining the Atari Jaguar boot ROM (and/or CD boot ROM) and several game
ROMs you can now use Virtual Jaguar using the following command:

./vj [romfile] [-switches]

The context of ROMFILE is the filename of the an Atari Jaguar ROM dump (can be
either compressed or uncompressed). You can also use switches. By just typing
./vj -? (or ./vj -help) you get an overview of the options you can use. WIN32
users should look into the stdout.txt in the directory they ran Virtual Jaguar
for that information.

If you prefer a nice GUI instead of typing in command lines, you can either
type ./vj or double click on the Virtual Jaguar executable. If you have a
directory full of ROM files, you can tell Virtual Jaguar where they are by
editing the appropriate line in the vj.cfg file (it assumes a ROMs directory
under the directory where VJ lives) so that they show up when you pick the
"Load" option from the "File" menu.

This emulator also emulates the Atari Jaguar gamepads. By using the following
keyboard or joystick settings you can (possibly) play a given game:

Atari Button C       : Z or joystick button 3
Atari Button B       : X or joystick button 2
Atari Button A       : C or joystick button 1
Atari Buttons 1 - 10 : Keypad 0 - 9 (0 = 10)
Atari Start/Pause    : ENTER
Atari Select         : '
Atari UP             : UP    or joystick UP
Atari DOWN           : DOWN  or joystick DOWN
Atari LEFT           : LEFT  or joystick LEFT
Atari RIGHT          : RIGHT or joystick RIGHT
Atari #              : Keypad /
Atari *              : Keypad *

With ESC you can easily stop Virtual Jaguar GCC/SDL which will get you back to
the GUI (pressing ESC again will take you back to the game). To exit VJ, you
can either select File|Quit or press the "Q" key on your keyboard. If you want
to change the key layout, simply edit the vj.cfg file and change the keys. :)
NOTE: There are quite a few keys mapped to debugging functions at present. You
have been warned!

-------------------
- A note on sound -
-------------------

By default, the Virtual Jaguar's DSP is turned off, since it doesn't work very
well at present (it requires a lot of horsepower to sound decent at this
point!). In order to hear any sound at all, you have to either edit the vj.cfg
file and change the appropriate line or set the DSP on in the GUI (found under
Settings|Misc). One word of caution: Use the old DSP core instead of the new
pipelined version for now--the new pipelined DSP core has not yet been
optimized and runs quite slow at present! Once the DSP issues have been ironed
out, it will be turned on by default and you won't have to deal with it
anymore. ;)

-----------
- Finally -
-----------

If you find bugs, enhance the code or simply have questions, drop us an e-mail
at sdlemu AT ngemu DOT com or drop a message on the SDLEMU Official Forum.

More information about this project (releases/WIP) can be found at the official
Virtual Jaguar website [http://www.icculus.org/virtualjaguar] and on the SDLEMU
website [http://sdlemu.ngemu.com].

We hope you enjoy the emulator and will use it wisely!

Special thanks go to guys over at ngemu.com and #ngemu (EFNET). Thanks also to
David Raingeard of Potato Emulation who originally developed this emulator and
released the sources to the public. We couldn't have done it without you!

SDLEMU
